Israel has freed 180 Palestinians
from prison over
the first four days of the truce,
mainly women and minors.
Many of them were detained
but never charged.
Prison service officials
say that 30 were released yesterday.
CNN's Ben
Wedeman is live for us in Jerusalem.
Ben, walk us through
the diplomatic efforts
to release more Palestinian prisoners
and detainees.
Where is that conversation now?
Well, that's part
and parcel of the negotiations
over the Israeli hostages as well.
And, of course, tonight
is the last day of the two day extension
that was agreed upon.
And the diplomats are doing their best
to try to work out a formula
to extend it.
We heard Majid Ansari,
the spokesman
for the Qatari foreign minister,
the Qataris,
of course, the linchpin
in these
negotiations,
saying that they are optimistic
that a more an agreement will be reached
to extend it at least for two days.
And, of course, they are now looking
beyond the next two days because
officials negotiators say that
the number of women and children
currently being held in Gaza
will be exhausted after two days.
And then it's going to be a question of
how do you deal with the civilian men
and the Israeli soldiers who are in Gaza?
And our understanding from the
foreign ministry spokesman
is that the next phase
is looking at civilian Israelis
being held inside Gaza.
And we've seen, for instance, yesterday
William Burns, the head of the CIA,
was meeting
with Qatari, Egyptian
and Israeli officials in Doha.
Clearly, they're looking beyond
this phase
where the focus is on releasing
women and children in Gaza.
And, of course,
the similar release of detainees
and prisoners held in Israeli jails.
But at the moment,
there's still is no agreement
for an extension.
So there always is that risk
if no agreement is reached.
If fighting
could begin again, of course.
Ben Wedeman,
thank you so much for that update.
And right now, negotiators are racing
to try to extend the truce
between Israel and Hamas.
The current deal expiring
just hours from now.
This is more hostages arrive in Israel
after being released by Hamas.
Two sources telling CNN that at least one
American hostage is expected
to be handed over in the exchange today.
Let's get more now with CNN's M.J. Lee.
She's live for us at the White House.
M.J., tell us what you're hearing
from the Biden administration.
Well, Brianna,
the White House
is certainly not commenting right now
on CNN's earlier reporting
that an American is expected
to be one of the hostages freed today.
We are, of course,
still waiting for that day.
Six group of hostages to be released.
If that were to happen,
it would mark the second time
that an American citizen is released
during the course of this truce.
But just to remind you
what the White House
had initially said,
they were hoping for and expecting
was for three Americans to be released
as part of the initial group
of 50 women and children.
Of course,
we saw Abigail
adorn the four year old Israeli
American release on Sunday,
but no word whatsoever
from the White House
so far on the two other women
that were supposed to be released
as a part of that initial 50.
So we are still waiting
for those hostages to be released.
And we will learn
whether one American woman
ends up being a part of that release.
But again, no comment on that
right now from the White House.
Part of this agreement, M.J.,
is that the International Red Cross
is supposed to get access
to to check on the hostages
that are still in Gaza,
and that has not happened.
Hamas has not allowed that.
How is the U.S. responding?
Yeah, Brianna, a
part of the deal
really was that the red Cross officials
would be able to go in
and check on the hostages
that are still being held in Gaza,
get a sense of how they're doing
and really be able
to report back on the status
of some of these hostages.
And that has not happened yet.
And we know that U.S.
officials are among
those that are pushing for this to happen
because it was a part of the agreement.
Of course, a lot of people are keen
to get a better sense
of how these hostages are doing,
their conditions, their whereabouts.
Really, we have so little information
to work with right now.
Our understanding
and our reporting is that
even though that does mark
a violation in the agreement,
that it's not at the point
where that is about to derail
this deal,
that it is still going to go on
as long as hostages
continue to be released.
But we saw a statement from the Red Cross
president
saying that they are ready to go in,
but that they can't
really forcibly do that
unless they get permission to do so.
Basically,
they were saying
if they sort of force their force,
their way in
to try to check on these hostages, that
that could end up
actually endangering them.
So that's just one more reminder
of the sort of dangerous
and tenuous circumstances
that we're talking about here.
Yeah, certainly alarming.
And obviously,
officials want to get some information
about those who are still in Gaza.
M.J. Lee live for us at the White House.
Thank you for us.
Meantime,
according to senior administration
officials, the U.S.
has urged Israel
to be more precise
in targeting Hamas in Gaza,
especially in the south,
where many civilians
were told to flee for safety.
The Palestinian Ministry of Health
in the West Bank
says that nearly 15,000 people
have been killed since October 7th.
Tens of thousands more have been injured.
Let's bring in
CNN military analyst, retired
Air Force Colonel Cedric
Leighton to discuss.
Colonel, if Israel agrees to this U.S.
suggestion of a more targeted approach,
what does that actually look like?
So, Boris,
there are a lot of different aspects
to this.
And precision is kind of
in the eye of the beholder.
What you're talking about here
is when you look at the Israeli forces,
the light blue is
where their clearing operations
have taken place.
They're looking
at the northern part of Gaza
and the central part of Gaza,
kind of all around Gaza City.
The dark blue shows that the furthest
this is the furthest point of advancement
for the Israeli forces.
Now, when you talk
about precision strikes, let's do it.
Let's take a quick
look at this video right here, because
this is something that is not precise.
What you're dealing with here is
there are certain aspects of this
where you can see
where they struck certain areas.
But all of this has been obliterated.
That is an example of
not really a precision strike.
This is more of a deliberate strike
that goes across a wide area.
The areas that you're talking about here
are ones that,
you know,
clearly have civilian applications.
You see a washing machine right there.
You see a hole
right here
where a bomb crater
dragged through this particular building.
That's the kind of thing
that if you targeted directly,
that is a precision strike.
But all this rest of this destruction
is not emblematic of a precision strike.
So precision
being in the eye of the beholder.
It appears that there's a difference
between the US definition
of a precision strike and Israeli.
Is that a fair assessment?
That is a fair assessment
because when the Israelis
are looking at this,
they really have certain
they're constrained by
some of the weapons that they have,
but they are also constrained, by the way
in which they employ those weapons.
And one of the key
things that they're doing
is they believe that
they need to take out
a wide swath of this,
these areas,
because, for example,
if you go into the map of Gaza itself,
all of this area right
here was ordered to be evacuated.
And the reason for that
is because of the strikes that we saw
in the example of the video
in Khan Yunis.
The rest of Gaza is also
subject to these kinds of strikes,
and that can really result
in a lot of civilian casualties,
even more than the 15,000
or so that may have been killed
during this period.
Colonel, let's go back to that
initial map,
because we're a few hours
away from this sort of temporary truce
potentially expiring there.
Officials that are working to extend it
right now.
But if it does wind up
expiring and hostilities resume,
where do you see that playing out?
So let's take a look right here at
these areas right here,
of course,
where the Israelis have a presence
right now.
We can expect them to do
is move into these areas
right here, into Gaza City,
basically taking out every single thing
that they can find in in these areas.
They can do that potentially.
They can also come in this way
and cut off the
any retreat by Hamas
from here into the south.
The southern area is one
in which they are hoping
the Israelis
are hoping
to have kind of an area
where they can put
a lot of the civilian population.
They've actually offered an area
up as kind of a safe haven.
But that is something that is very small,
very small area near Khan Yunis.
And it is an area
that is really not conducive
to keeping people there for a long time.
And it's also not conducive
to allowing
for further military operations
in this area,
because you could find
a lot of Hamas fighters in an area
like this, as well as who is
Israel
has kind of double challenges
in this in this particular situation
when it comes to humanitarian aid.
I want to go back
to the video of Khan Younis,
because this, I think, underscores
the point that there is immense
need among the civilian population
in different parts of Gaza.
Obviously, this is just one example.
What happens to the flow
of humanitarian aid
and the aid that's already in Gaza once
hostilities resumed?
So the aid that already is
has been sent into
Gaza is at risk of being destroyed
and stockpiles that they have anything
that could be used, food stuffs,
you know, clothing
during the cold months of the year,
all of these kinds of things.
Shelter obviously,
with this kind of stuff you see.
But that could all be eliminated.
And Khan
Yunis was an area
that was not specifically set aside
for military operations.
It was supposed to be
in a safer part of Gaza.
And you see what's
happened to that already.
Now, Colonel Cedric Clinton, always
appreciate the perspective again.
Right now,
the temporary truce
set to expire in a matter of hours.
Officials are working to extend
that as we speak.
Thanks so much for the perspective,
as always. You bet.